The DA has written to the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, to extend an invitation to speak and participate in the upcoming Firearms Summit scheduled for Tuesday, 22 June 2021. The event is set to be the largest virtual Guns Summit in South Africa, comprising of civil society organisations, academia, various interest groups and members of the public. The DA believes that it is important that the Minister participate in this event in order to afford him an opportunity to clarify the government’s position on the controversial Firearms Control Amendment Bill. The Summit will  provide an opportunity for the legislation to be fully unpacked, understood and debated. We trust that the Minister will put politics aside and accept our invitation. The Bill proposes scrapping self-defence as a reason to apply for a firearm and effectively seeks to take away the rights of South Africans to lawfully choose how they want to defend themselves and their families against rising incidents of violence and criminality. The DA is strongly opposed to this draconian Bill and we encourage fellow South Africans to share their views on this ill considered piece of legislation by signing the DA’s petition opposing the Firearms Control Amendment Bill. To date, more than 73 000 South Africans have made their voices heard. SAPS is in a state of disarray and is failing dismally to fight crime in this country. It is just mindboggling how any government would come up with a Bill that will put law-abiding citizens at the mercy of criminals. We encourage South Africans to follow the Summit on Tuesday at 10AM live on our YouTube and Facebook channels. The DA has also opened accreditation for members of the media. Journalists wishing to cover cover the Summit are encouraged to accredit by submitting their name and surname, media house, email address and cellphone number Bongisa Mhaga (061 109 2590 /bongisam@da.org.za or Debreé Kluge (072 034 4970 / debreek@da.org.za). A special Zoom and WhatsApp group will be made available to the media to pose questions and queries to the panelists and guest organisations. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.