Please find attached a soundbite by Siviwe Gwarube MP. Pictures can be downloaded here and here. The DA has today laid criminal charges against Minister of Health, Dr Zweli Mkhize, and the Health Director-General, Dr Sandile Buthelezi, over the R150 million Covid-corruption scandal involving Digital Vibes. It has been reported that Minister Mkhize personally signed off on the submission that contained the contract to this company ran and owned by close associates of his. Should this in fact be true, it is in direct contravention of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act (POCCA) Section 3 and specifically Sections 12 and 13 which relate to acts of service offered or accepted in exchange for government contracts and tenders. In addition, the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) explicitly states that the signing off of any contracts is the function of the accounting officer and not the executive authority – as was allegedly the case with Minister Mkhize. Therefore, the Health DG, Dr Buthelezi must also be investigated for his involvement and possible contravention of the PFMA with gross negligence. The allegations against Minister Mhkize are incredibly serious. It is unconscionable that President Cyril Ramaphosa does not take action against the Minister – pending the outcome of the Special Investigative Unit (SIU) investigation. The Minister cannot be both a player and a referee in the case concerning him. By remaining in his post while the SIU investigation takes place, he could undermine the integrity of the process and risk undue political influence. That is why the DA remains resolute in calling for the President to suspend him pending the outcomes of the investigations. We are also of the view that the processes by both the South African Police Service (SAPS) and the SIU can and should run concurrently. The two arms of the criminal justice system could collaborate and cross-check with one another to get to the bottom of this matter. Just yesterday, the SIU confirmed that they are investigating over R14 billion in Covid-corruption. The person tasked with leading the response to Covid-19 in the country cannot have allegations of this nature hanging over him. We call on both agencies – the SIU and the SAPS to conduct their investigation without any fear or favour. The ball is now firmly in the President’s court. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.