Please find attached English and Afrikaans soundbites by Chris Hunsinger MP. The DA rejects the disastrous decision by the Department of Transport to block the American airline, Delta Air Lines, from operating routes to and from Cape Town. It has come to light that after repeated requests from the airline for a co-terminalisation authority “to allow a stop in Cape Town on the return segment of its Atlanta-Johannesburg service”, the government rejected this request. We call on Minister Fikile Mbalula to explain the rationale behind this nonsensical decision by the ANC government. Not only will this decision have far-reaching implications on tourism in the Western Cape, but could also result in potential job losses. It makes no sense why any give tokens would block such a lucrative venture that would ensure influx of tourists to our shores, especially given the economic devastation brought on by its extended Covid-19 lockdown. The DA will be engaging with experts within the aviation industry as well as the US Embassy and the City of Cape Town regarding the situation. We welcome the initiative by City of Cape Town MayCo Member, James Vos, and Wesgro reaching out to national government and other aviation stakeholders in order to find a remedy to this calamity that would allow Delta Air Lines to operate a route to Cape Town. The DA urges the government to reverse its decision to block Delta Airlines from operating this flight path, which has already resulted in the USA placing restrictions on South African Airlines (SAA). SAA is hardly able to survive its own mismanagement and can ill afford restriction from America against it. If South Africa’s people and its economy is to survive the Covid-19 pandemic, we need access to as many opportunities to reinvigorate the economy as possible. Tourism provides ample opportunity for entrepreneurs to create small businesses that will in turn create jobs for more people. Government should not stand in the way of the livelihoods of its people. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.