Furthermore, the independent investigation report conducted by SSA into allegations of sexual abuse, which was completed in September 2020, must be made available to the committee. This after SASCOC president, Barry Hendricks, refused to answer queries regarding serious allegations that coaches that have been accused of sexual abuse, some of whom criminal cases had been opened against, are still allowed to coach. The DA is also concerned that one of these coaches might accompany athletes to the Olympic Games in less than a month. In an interview to CityPress Mr. Hendricks said, “Must SASCOC respond to every MP who contacts us with queries and allegations?”, and as representatives of the parliamentary committee whose mandate is to conduct oversight over bodies such as SASCOC, we wish to make it very clear to the SASCOC president that he must indeed respond to our questions in full. The DA is shocked at the brazen manner in which Mr. Hendricks seems to be trying to avoid giving account of the safeguarding policies that should have been in place to protect all athletes against any manner of abuse and especially sexual abuse. His handling of the situation gives rise to fears for the safety of athletes, many of them minors. It is extremely concerning that coaches that have been accused of sexual abuse are still allowed to work at various federations. Both SASCOC and SSA’s policies have clear stipulations. Page 21 Point 18 of the SASCOC Code of Conduct states, “Employees are required by the act to inform their employers if they have been convicted of a sexual offence against a child or a person who is mentally disabled, or is alleged to have committed a sexual offence against a child or a person who is mentally disabled and who has been dealt with in terms of section 77 (6) or 78 (6) of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977, irrespective of whether or not such offence was committed or allegedly committed during the course of his or her employment, must without delay disclose such conviction or finding to his or her employer.” Since both SASCOC and SSA`s own constitutions are clear on what the procedures and guidelines are in such a situation, should they have failed to act to protect the victims of abuse and gender-based violence (GBV), they are guilty of enabling the alleged perpetrators by creating an environment where predatory behaviour not only appears to thrive, but seems to be rewarded. The DA has also written to the Safeguarding Committee with a host of questions, including what the Committee and SASCOC has done to safeguard athletes, especially minors, travelling to the Olympic Games as we have it on good authority that the Safeguarding Committee has only had one meeting since its inception. The DA will not stop fighting for the victims and we will not stop in our efforts to hold powerful entities such as SASCOC and SSA to account. Not only is it our mandate as Parliamentary representatives, but to do anything else would be morally reprehensible. Any athlete deserves to thrive in a safe environment free of fear that someone they are supposed to trust might try to harm them.