The Democratic Alliance (DA) is astounded that Siviwe Dongwana, one of South African Airways’ (SAA) two Business Rescue Practitioners (BRPs), has again managed to avoid accounting to Parliament for the airline’s business rescue debacle. Dongwana and SAA executives simply stayed away from a meeting with the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) today, on the basis that one of the BRPs, Les Matuson, had a bereavement in their family. While it is absolutely understandable that Matuson was unable to attend due to the loss in his family, we are puzzled as to Dongwana and SAA executives absence. There were two BRPs appointed for the SAA business rescue process, that has now taken some 16 months with absolutely no sign of a “rescue”,  and there is absolutely no reason why the BRP not affected by the bereavement could not have appeared before SCOPA. Dongwana being AWOL from Parliament is especially irksome given that the BRPs and their associated businesses have taken fees that are likely to be in the region of R300 million and growing. Not only have they taken massive fees from the taxpayer without achieving the rescue of SAA, they are now proposing that one of them, Dongwana (once the Director-General of Public Works during the Zuma/Nkandla scandal) and his business associate, Bongani Nkasana, be appointed as the so-called “receivers” for SAA. This is to seemingly continue with their self-enrichment through massive fees whilst they dish out the billions of rands in taxpayer bailouts that have amounted to some R32 billion over a two-year period. The DA stands with the millions of South Africans who are now jobless and many on the verge of starvation as a result of the ANC irrational lockdown of the economy. It is these South Africans who could be given lifesaving opportunities if the R10.5 billion and other bailouts yet to come, is used for stimulating economic opportunities rather than keeping SAA alive but totally unproductive. In the process of massive taxpayer bailouts for SAA the BRPs, who have repeatedly failed to account properly to Parliament, have taken and continue to take hundreds of millions of Rand in fees for themselves and their associated businesses. The DA will demand answers to critical questions when Parvin Gordhan, the Minister of Public Enterprises and the SAA BRPs, finally appear before SCOPA in the next week. All South Africans are entitled to know: Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status