The DA will request that both Athletics South Africa (ASA) and South Africa Schools Athletics (SASA) account to the parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture as a matter of urgency. This follows worrying reports from schools across the country that ASA is trying to bully them into only participating in ASA competitions. Athletics participation at school level usually runs on two tracks: on provincial and national level by SASA and on club level by ASA. While SASA provides a platform for all learners in South Africa – primary, secondary, and special educational needs learners – no matter their socio-economic situation, the ASA competitions are a lot more exclusive with participating learners having to join clubs and pay club fees, as well as providing for all their own transportation to and from competitions. The push to have learners only participate in ASA competitions is discriminatory as it will exclude a vast majority of athletes from poor backgrounds and those living in rural areas. ASA competitions have always been optional, and this is the first year that the entity seems to want to enforce participation. This restriction on athletic competitions hosted by SASA contradicts the Department of Basic Educations’ direction gazetted on 27 March 2021 that school sports matches may resume without spectators as long as there is compliance with Covid-19 hygiene and safety measures. It is astounding that ASA would be so completely unaware of the detriment their actions will bring to the development of athletics in South Africa, as well as its discrimination against learners unable to comply with financial and distance restrictions that club competitions bring. The Recognition of Sport and Recreation Bodies Regulations states that “Participation in any sport or recreation body must be open to all sections of the community and not be restricted for reasons of cost, gender, disability or […] any form of direct or indirect discrimination”. ASA’s own constitution states that one of its basic cornerstones is “The continual striving to ensure that no form of discrimination […] be permitted in athletics and to take all practicable measures to prevent such discrimination.” By trying to stifle all SASA competitions, the cornerstone in the grassroots development of athletics in South Africa, ASA is discriminating against all young athletes whose only option for talent development is their schools. If ASA is allowed to continue with its discrimination, athletics in South Africa will be stopped in its tracks. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.