Within the first month of taking office Nelson Mandela Bay’s new Coalition of Good Governance has managed to increase the Metro’s investments by more than a billion rand. This follows after National Treasury released R1,4 billion in grant funding to the Municipality after the election of a permanent Executive Mayor on 4 December 2020. The Municipality’s investment portfolio – which stood at R2,14 billion at the end November 2020 had increased to R3,5 billion by 31 December 2020. This money has been invested and will be used to ensure service delivery to residents. The previous ANC government did all in its power to not have a permanent mayor elected, even though the election of a mayor was a prerequisite required by National Treasury to release the R1,4 billion in grant funding. In November 2020 it was announced that the Metro had permanently lost R503 million when National Treasury refused the rollover of unused grant funding from the 2019/2020 financial year. These funds were earmarked for, amongst others, infrastructure development and drought mitigation measures. The previous ANC government must take full responsibility for this devastating financial blow that was dealt to residents. The Coalition of Good Governance will now ensure that the recently received R1,4 billion in grant funding will be spent on stabilising Nelson Mandela Bay by making budget available for service delivery. This funding is also earmarked for, amongst others, urban settlement development, financial management, infrastructure skills development, integrated city development, the public transport network and the expanded public works programme. Service delivery budgets were insufficient and this government will be topping up these budgets to improve the lives of residents. Positives steps have already been taken. Prime example is the budget virement of R8,2 million I signed off last week to repair 8 000 to 10 000 potholes over the next two months, traffic lights that are being fixed and road markings being painted. Funds are also being made available to buy new lightbulbs for streetlights and water and electricity infrastructure is being repaired across the metro. We will also ensure that previously marginalised communities – such as the Northern Areas, Uitenhage and Despatch – will get the care and services they deserve. We will ensure that the contractors appointed deliver services at market rate and that the Municipality gets value for money. Good governance and accountability have returned to the Metro. Together we can take Nelson Mandela Bay forward again!