The Democratic Alliance (DA) will undertake a national oversight tour of all 9 provinces to assess the implementation, success and shortcomings of government’s interventions as they relate to Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities. We will assess progress in the sphere of youth unemployment. Young people continue to be unemployed irrespective of their education level. More alarming is that the rate of unemployment of young people between the ages of 25-34 years is more than double that of people in the age bracket of 45-54 years old. National and local government must ensure that job creation and youth empowerment is at the forefront of their agenda and that they are equipped with the necessary entrepreneurial skills to build businesses and employ more young people. The oversight will also focus on gender-based violence and femicide and the implementation of the National Strategic Plan (NSP) in Provinces and local governments. The DA will be visiting Thuthuzela Care Centres, victim support centres, the Commission of Gender Equality and community organisations to assess the roll-out of the government interventions on GBVF and its implications on the ground. In order to assess if the NSP is working for the womxn of South Africa, it is imperative that the DA is on the ground and visit sites that directly work in its implementation of programmes directed at eradicating violence against womxn, children and the LGBTIQA+ community. Finally, the oversight tour will look at NGOs and disability centres in order to raise awareness about the challenges that persons with disabilities still face in this country and find out if these centres are well maintained by provincial governments. The oversight programme is as follows: Western Cape – 26 & 27 February 2021: North West – 1 March 2021: Free State – 8 March 2021: KwaZulu-Natal – 15 March 2021: Limpopo – 22 March 2021: Mpumalanga- 26 March 2021: Northern Cape- 19 March 2021: Gauteng – 29 March 2021: Eastern Cape – 2 April 2021: At the end of the oversight tour, the DA will table an action plan to the Department of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities based on our findings. The DA has and continues to fight tirelessly to put forward alternative plans to alleviate joblessness, poverty and violence. Our duty is to take this responsibility, own it and see this dream realised together.