Tomorrow, in his State of the Nation Address, President Ramaphosa is going to have to show South Africans that he is in fact the man in charge, and not just another spectator to everything that is happening to our country. Three years into his presidency he is yet to display this kind of decisive leadership, but such is the urgency of our situation that he is going to have to discover his fortitude by tomorrow evening. We can’t afford an appeaser or a mediator for a president. We can’t afford a president who is so afraid of competing factions in his party that he is unable to act on anything. We need a president who is willing to ruffle feathers. We need a president who is prepared to stare down the enemies of growth and the enemies of democracy in the ANC and the tripartite alliance. A president who is not afraid to do the right thing, even if that could send damaging shockwaves through his own party. Our country is facing unprecedented threats on three fronts – a pandemic crisis, an economic crisis and a crisis of our democracy as revealed in the Zondo testimony – and the president is going to have to face all three these crises head-on and concurrently in his SONA. This cannot be another SONA of unattainable fantasies of bullet trains and high tech cities. It cannot be another SONA of announcing impossible projects that sound wonderful but will never be realised. This has to be a SONA of detailed, meaningful and measurable plans to protect the people from the virus that looks to be part of our lives for the foreseeable future, to protect our economy and set it on a path of growth, and to protect our democracy from those who have subverted it to gain power and wealth. If he cannot do this, then 2021 will be a very dark year for our country. Protecting the people: The only way our economy and our society can return to a semblance of normality is through the swift and large-scale acquisition and rollout of vaccines. To ensure this, the president’s SONA announcement will have to cover these points: Protecting the economy: Even before the pandemic our economy was in recession, but this has been compounded by almost a year of business-killing restrictions, many of which were entirely unjustifiable. Tens of thousands of businesses closed their doors and millions of people lost their jobs. Economic growth is the only way to create jobs, and if government has any intention of doing so it needs to change its attitude towards business. The private sector is the solution, not the problem. Tomorrow evening President Ramaphosa will need to demonstrate that he realises this, and that he stands on the side of growth and jobs by announcing measures to achieve the following:  Create an enabling environment for businesses to start and grow and thrive: Reject investment-killing suite of “central command and control” policies: Place the small business sector front and centre in the country’s job creation effort. The norm for upper-middle income countries such as South Africa is that 40% of all employed people are either self-employed or employers. In South Africa this is only 20%. This is because small businesses here operate in a hostile regulatory environment designed around large companies that employ thousands of people and have entire departments that deal with regulatory compliance, including their own in-house labour lawyers. There is a direct correlation between South Africa’s very low number of small businesses and our very high unemployment rate. President Ramaphosa should announce: Get debt under control so that we can reduce our interest bill. We are currently spending R1 of every R5 of revenue on interest payments. That will soon become R1 of every R2 unless we pay off debt and bring the cost of debt down by building confidence. Some of the measures that the president should announce include: Protecting our democracy: The recent shocking testimony at the Zondo Commission has confirmed that our very democracy is under attack by forces within the ruling party. The scale of the looting through the State Security Agency, and the scope of “projects” funded by this looting aimed at subverting democracy – from propaganda news reporting to swaying the judiciary – is tantamount to treason. It is crucial that we see arrests and prosecutions of all those involved. But if we are to truly safeguard our democracy, then the president is going to have to announce measures that will deal with the root cause of this subversion of democracy: the capture of the state, as well as agree to electoral reforms to turn Parliament into a proper watchdog. These are some of the announcements the DA will be looking for in the president’s address on Thursday evening. But not only the DA. Many of these same suggestions have been made by others too – from business to civil society and other political parties. This is because they are widely recognised as sound plans and crucial reforms. The question now is: Will President Ramaphosa finally have the courage to step up and put his stamp on his own presidency? Will he corral whatever reformers he can find in his party and get them to back these reforms? Or will he again choose the path of least resistance, leaving us to face yet another year of platitudes, dithering and economic implosion? 