Please find attached soundbite by Adv Glynnis Breytenbach MP. The DA will lay criminal charges against Duduzile Zuma-Sambudla, Edward Zuma, Duduzane Zuma and EFF leader Julius Malema for incitement of violence.  Over the past week, following the arrest of former President Jacob Zuma, his daughter Duduzile took to social media to post a number of tweets that encourage and incite the violence and looting that has destabilised KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng and which is spreading to other parts of the country.  See tweets here and here.  These tweets follow utterances by Edward Zuma that law enforcement agencies would have to go through him before they arrest his father. These comments were both inflammatory and reckless.  There is also a video making the rounds on social media in which Duduzane Zuma wows to “fight” to get his father out of prison.  For his part, Julius Malema threatened to join the anarchy on the streets if the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) is deployed and likened the deployment to a declaration war against civilians instead of an attempt to maintain law and order. We are also deeply disturbed by Malema’s racially charged remarks about the Indian community that have the potential to incite further racial tensions.  Zuma-Sambudla and Malema, between them, have millions of followers on Twitter who could perceive these statements as literal.  The DA urges the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) and the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, to act against the Zuma children and Malema to ensure that they are investigated criminally for incitement to commit violence and their talk of war.  We cannot allow anyone to get away with this kind of reckless behaviour and make such sweeping statements with impunity. Failure to act will only embolden the Zumas and Malema to say and do what they want with no fear of consequence. The NPA and SAPS need to act against them now. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.