Please find attached a soundbite by Kevin Mileham MP. The DA has noted with concern Minister Gwede Mantashe’s decision to prohibit the sale of petroleum products in portable containers. While we understand his motivation in doing so – namely to prevent the stockpiling and hoarding of fuel, and to prevent the use of such products in arson –  this will have a profound impact on those residents who use generators, certain power tools (pumps, lawnmowers, weedeaters etc.) and the agricultural sector more broadly. It should come as no surprise that South Africa has no refined fuel reserves. The DA has raised this issue with the Minister on several occasions, but has been rebuffed. The recommendations of the Moerane Commission in this regard, which were incorporated into a Draft Strategic Fuel Stocks Policy in 2013, have been ignored, and as a result, we now have imminent fuel shortages. We believe that Minister Mantashe would do better to rapidly restore South Africa’s refining capacity, by among other things getting the refineries that have been shut down since early 2020 restarted and to ensure their security as National Key Points. This may warrant the deployment of security forces to provide a secure environment. Additionally, it is vital that the distribution network for fuel be secured. This includes the Transnet Multi Product Pipelines which distribute fuel from KwaZulu-Natal to various inland provinces. These pipelines have been the subject of extensive sabotage and theft in the past. The last leg of distribution, via tankers to individual petrol stations, is equally critical, and the security of the tankers and the safety of the staff operating them is paramount. Minister Mantashe has once again missed the boat. He needs to consult with the Ministers of Transport, Agriculture, Defence and Police to rebuild and secure our fuel supply and ensure an equitable distribution to all who need it. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.