Please find a corrected version of the statement below.  This morning’s media briefing by Minister for Social Development, Lindiwe Zulu, was a wasted opportunity for the Minister to provide clarity and reassurance to the struggling ECD sector. The media briefing shared no new information despite public outcry for the Minister to address the vaccination of ECD employees and payment of the ECD Presidential Employment Stimulus Relief Fund (ECD-ESRF). Minister Zulu should have provided a clear timeline as to when ECD employees will be vaccinated. Minister Angie Motshekga was able to secure vaccinations for teachers under the Department of Basic Education, but Minister Zulu has failed to follow suit. Instead, the Minister has once again left the sector in limbo. The Minister failed to indicate when ECD-ESRF payments will continue as Provincial Treasuries are still to approve roll over funds. All while many ECDs permanently close their doors one after the other due to lack of financial support since the beginning of lockdown in March 2020. Provinces such as KZN are sitting on R91 242 million meant for ECD-ESRF while Northern Cape on R39 300 million, Free State on R38 880, North West on R28 million and Mpumalanga on R30 495 million all while ECD employees and the children they teach, feed and care for, are left hungry and out in the cold during adjusted level 4 lockdown. In a written reply to a parliamentary question, the department indicated that a total of 28,283 applications were received by ECD centres while only 23 079 ECD employees have been paid despite the targeted amount for the ECD-ESRF being 108 833 ECD employees. The Minister stated that ECDs remain the full responsibility of DSD even though the ECD transfer of administration and powers and functions proclamation was signed on 27 June 2021. However, given the Minister’s failure to address any of the ECD sectors’ pressing concerns this morning, one has to question whether or not Minister Zulu and her department has already ‘checked out’. The Democratic Alliance has written to the Social Development Portfolio Committee Chairperson, Hon. Mondli Gungubele, on 25 June 2021 to urgently call a joint committee meeting with the Department of Social Development and Department of Basic Education to obtain clarity on the status of the ECD migration. The last joint committee meeting took place on 4 March 2020, more than a year ago, with just over 10 months until the April 2022 deadline for the transfer. The testimonies provided by the many ECD practitioners, principals and centre managers during the Children’s Amendment Bill public hearings in Limpopo and Mpumalanga earlier this month, displays a sector in crisis and many misinformed about the ECD migration. The Democratic Alliance will continue to support the ECD sector’s call for urgent vaccination and payment of the ECD-ESRF. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.