Please find attached English and Afrikaans soundbites by Adv Glynnis Breytenbach MP, as well as English and Afrikaans video clips. Download pictures here, here, here and here. The DA has today laid incitement to violence charges against Duduzile Zuma-Sambudla, Edward Zuma, Duduzane Zuma and EFF leader Julius Malema in Cape Town. Duduzile Zuma-Sambudla has posted a number of tweets over the course of the last few days encouraging and inciting the violence and looting which has destablised KwaZulu-Natal and parts of Gauteng. These tweets have typically included images of destruction, arson and looting with Duduzile expressing her support of these actions in the captions of the tweets. Please see screenshots here and here. There is also a video making the rounds on social media in which Duduzane Zuma wows to “fight” to get his father out of prison. Whilst Edward Zuma made utterances prior to his father’s imprisonment that law enforcement agencies would have to go through him before they arrest his father. For his part, Julius Malema threatened on his private Twitter account: “No soldiers on our streets! Otherwise, we are joining. All fighters must be ready … they won’t kill us all.” This tweet was in response to reports that President Cyril Ramaphosa would be announcing the deployment of the army to quell violent riots and looting across KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng. Malema likened the deployment to a declaration of war against civilians instead of an attempt to maintain law and order. The DA is of the view that these comments and statements by the Zuma siblings and Malema were not only inflammatory but also incredibly reckless. Especially as Zuma-Sambudla and Malema have millions of followers between them on Twitter who could perceive these statements as literal. It is now in the hands of the South African Police Service (SAPS) and the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) to ensure that the Zumas and Malema is held to account to the fullest extent of the law. Law enforcement officials have a responsibility to pursue criminality without fear or favour in order to set an example that all South Africans are equal before the law and that all criminal offences will be punished. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.