Please find attached soundbite by Veronica van Dyk MP. The DA has written to the Swimming South Africa (SSA) president and board member of the South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee (SASCOC), Alan Fritz, regarding the serious allegations that not only are there still coaches at SSA that have been accused of sexually abusing swimmers, some who are minors, and against whom criminal cases have been opened, but that SSA has yet to release a report into an investigation of these allegations. The DA has also sought this report through a Promotion of Access to Information Act (PAIA) application as we believe that it sheds light on the sexual misconduct that seems to be rife at SSA. The Goldman report was completed in September 2020 but seems to be hidden away since then. This report needs to see the light of day as a matter of urgency to ensure that the safety of swimmers at SSA are safeguarded. It cannot be that sexual predators are protected at SSA while victims and other swimmers are at risk of being harassed or worse. And while the swim team for the Tokyo Olympic Games have yet to be announced, the DA is extremely worried that coaches accused of sexual abuse will accompany the team to the Games, which will not only put athletes at risk, but also reward vile predatory behaviour. South Africa needs to know if and how all members of Team South Africa was vetted. We also need to know what safeguarding policies SSA has in place and more importantly whether they have been implemented at all. At the moment it seems that complaints of abuse are simply swept under the carpet in an effort to avoid scandal and responsibility. Mr. Fritz needs to ensure that his swimmers are protected at all times. They fall under his care. The DA would also remind him that under Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act 32 of 2007 it is offence to fail to report knowledge of the sexual abuse of minors to the South African Police Service (SAPS), and that an investigation by British newspaper The Guardian last year revealed his failure in this regard. Mr. Fritz cannot continue to fail swimmers under his care. If he wishes to be in a position of power, he must shoulder all the responsibilities that come with it. If he cannot do that, he should be replaced as SSA president and SASCOC board member with someone who takes the safety and well-being of the athletes to heart. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.