Having been caught up in wall-to-wall mayoral selection interviews last week, I was unable to properly analyse the results of the by-elections on Wednesday 19th May. Eventually, over the weekend, I found a spare moment to do so. Unsurprisingly, I discovered that the truth about those results is entirely different from the picture painted in the newspapers, and parroted by broadcasters. A summary of the main trends revealed in these by-elections are these: Of course, there was also some bad news.  We lost four wards in specific circumstances where smaller ethnic- and race-based parties are splintering the opposition, and making it difficult for us to do the really important work of South African politics  —   beating the ANC. This is bad news, not only for the DA, but for all South Africans and we need to address it. But it is only one part of the picture, (and a small one at that). The really important trends (that already became apparent in by-elections during 2020 and were reinforced during 2021), have not been analysed anywhere, as far as I am aware.  I therefore do so here: The bottom line is this: Across 64 by-elections where the DA faced-off against the ANC, in November and December 2020 and in May 2021, the ANC grew in only 18 and declined in 46. In contrast, the DA grew in 36 – well over half — and declined in 28. Moreover, the DA’s support doubled in several of these by-elections, while ANC support doubled in none. Some of the most notable examples include: These are simply remarkable results compared to what we were polling only a few years ago. A truthful analysis of the by-elections reveal that it is the ANC that is imploding while the DA is growing across broad right across South Africa. Yes, we do have localised problems and we are doing our best to understand and to reverse the negative trends.  But the full picture tells a different story.  And it is a story that, for some reason, the media and columnists refuse to tell. Either they genuinely do not understand it, or they wish to deliberately mislead the public for their own motives. And, irony of ironies, having falsely described the DA as “imploding” some columnists then blame the DA for “letting South Africa down” by not growing, as Makhudu Sefara did in the Sunday Times last week. I have given up trying to understand the South African media and its motives.  All I can do is try to get as close to the truth as possible, and convey this to those who are interested in facts, rather than the agendas of those who call themselves “political commentators”.