The DA in Gauteng wishes to congratulate the DA-led administration in Tshwane who supported and approved a fully funded, pro service delivery budget in council today. This budget finely balances the dire financial situation left by the Illegal ANC administrators and the need of for service delivery to Tshwane residents. The budget is prioritizing service delivery to residents by committing funds to projects like streetlight repairs, stabilizing the electricity grid, upgrading waterworks and the water network and improving clinic services. DA Mayor Randall Williams and his team followed an approach to tariff increases that leaves residents more in control of their municipal spend. This, while utilities are increased by 14.59% for electricity and 8% for water due to bulk increases from Eskom and Rand Water Respectively. The bold decision was taken to keep property rates and taxes as low as possible by only a 2% increase. While residents have control over their electricity and water usage, property rates are based on a valuation roll residents have no control over and thus it makes sense to lend a helping hand in this manner to make up for the Eskom electricity increases. It is important to note that in total revenue the City only sees an increase of 4.5%. This, combined with the R4billion deficit inherited by the Illegal ANC administrators means that this budget is reliant on long term loans to ensure service delivery. After facing two Moody downgrades during the administration period, the Freedom Front Plus who voted against this budget did not put residents first and risked further downgrades and the city reaching junk status. The DA ensured that this budget is laying the foundation to ensure positive future credit ratings by allowing for a R20.7 million surplus, which is possible due to carefully considered cost control measures. The approval of this budget is welcomed by the DA and we believe this is a step in the right direction to provide stability in the City of Tshwane, which is much needed by the residents of the city. Local Government Elections are coming up in 2021! Visit check.da.org.za to check your voter registration status.